---
layout: post
title: CI on Power9 (PPC64LE) LPAR using snapper
---

Running a CI testsuite on Intel or MAC based hardware is quite common these days. Most of the time
the software stacks involved are containers (*insert your favourite container orchestrator here*) or
other neat solutions such as vagrant that allow to spin up pristine test environments.

This works nice, if the software you have to run your tests against does not require
access to real hardware. While some of the mentioned solutions are available on Power PC too,
it was not sufficient for the case i had to solve this time. I had to execute
tests directly on a Power 9 LPAR with SLES12/15 installed.

While this seems like an easy task, keep in mind that Virtualization on
Power is not something that involves the possibility to create snapshots and
alike. An  [LPAR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logical_partition) (logical
partition) is a subset of a Power systems hardware which is managed by a VIO
server running AIX.

Wouldnt it be easy to setup an LPAR running linux and then virtualize using KVM
and alike? (using hardware passthrough?) *No:* KVM is currently not supported
on Power 9 and running qemu in full virtualization mode is *not* a performant
solution.

So how to solve this? The Requirements are as follows:

{% highlight bash %}
1) Have multiple logical partitions with different os flavours.
2) Install third party software into the running system
4) Execute CI suite
5) Reset the system to a pristine state
6) Execute tests for the next build.
{% endhighlight %}

The main obstacle was point 4): *how to reset the system into a pristine state?*

Implementing a complete re-install of the instance using tftp and autoinstall
would be possible, but is too complicated.

Hypervisor based snapshots are not possible: no easy way to reset the system via snapshot.

Solution: use [**Snapper**](https://doc.opensuse.org/documentation/leap/archive/15.0/reference/html/book.opensuse.reference/cha.snapper.html)

SLES comes with a nice tool called [snapper](https://github.com/openSUSE/snapper) which
allows to create snapshots of your BTRFS volumes and simply
[rollback](https://doc.opensuse.org/documentation/leap/archive/15.0/reference/html/book.opensuse.reference/cha.snapper.html#sec.snapper.snapshot-boot)
the sytems root filesystem to an older snapshot!

It works by using the btrfs subvolume snapshot feature to create snapshots of
your btrfs volumes. You can easily rollback a complete (sub)volume or undo changes,
even view differences between snapshots. By default it even creates snapshots
automatically if administators change system settings or install software
components!

The current solution for this particular CI case via snapper looks as follows:

1) Setup an lpar and install an SLE based distribution

2) Remove the zypper plugin that auto-create snapshots on sofware installation,
disable automatic snapshots for the root volume:
 
{% highlight bash %}
 zypper remove -y snapper-zypp-plugin
 sed -i 's/USE_SNAPPER="yes"/USE_SNAPPER="no"/g' /etc/sysconfig/yast2
 snapper -c root set-config "TIMELINE_CREATE=no"
{% endhighlight %}

3) Bring the node online in the local Jenkins environment.

4) Create the master snapshot of the finalized setup:

{% highlight bash %}
snapper create --description "ci-snapshot"
{% endhighlight %}

Now the system is ready for executing testcases. The Testcase would then
rollback the snapshot after finalization (based on success or not).
The steps executed by a Jenkins build step might look like:

{% highlight bash %}
set -e
# test something
grep root /etc/passwd
SNAP_ID=$(snapper list | grep ci-snapshot | awk '{print $1}')
# rollback the system snapshot
snapper rollback $SNAP_ID
echo "Rebooting system"
# dont shutdown immediately otherwise jenkins agent marks
# run with failure due to EOF
shutdown -r -t 1 
{% endhighlight %}

The *snapper rollback* command creates a new writable btrfs volume based on the
pristine system snapshot (and does also create a copy of the current running
state of the volume for later investigation) and defines it as the default
subvolume for the next system boot.

After reboot, the System state is reset to its base snapshot state and can
execute the next testrun! Jenkins will mark the agents state online as soon
as its reachable again and the next testrun can be executed.

If you didnt know about snapper yet, [**Have a look at its
documentation**](https://doc.opensuse.org/documentation/leap/archive/15.0/reference/html/book.opensuse.reference/cha.snapper.html) .
