---
layout: post
title: Libvirt/KVM Backup on Debian Bullseye
---

The libvirt and qemu versions in Debian Bullseye support a new feature that
allows for easier backup and recovery of virtual machines. Instead of using
snapshots for backup operation, its now possible to enable [dirty
bitmaps](https://www.qemu.org/docs/master/interop/bitmaps.html). Other
hypervisors tend to call this "changed block tracking".

Using the new [backup
begin](https://libvirt.org/kbase/live_full_disk_backup.html) approach, its not
only possible to create live full backups (without having to create an
snapshot) but also track the changes between so called `checkpoints`, 
which is very useful for incremental backups.

Over the course of the last few months, i have been working on a
simple backup and recovery utility called [virtnbdbackup](https://github.com/abbbi/virtnbdbackup)

It uses the pull based approach in the libvirt api set and currently
supports:

 * Thin provisioned full and incremental backups.
 * Compression (lz4).
 * Freezing the virtual machine guest fs via qemu-agent (if installed)
 * Multithreaded backup, if multiple disks are attached.
 * Point in time recovery to a given incremental backup.
 * Includes nbdkit plugin and utility that allows to map the thin provisioned
   backup images to a block device, for single file or instant recovery (boot
   the virtual machine directly from the backup image)

**Preparing the virtual machines**

The dirty bitmap feature is not enabled by default, users can enable
it by adding a new capability to a virtual machines configuration:

{% highlight bash %}
 <domain type='kvm' id='1' xmlns:qemu='http://libvirt.org/schemas/domain/qemu/1.0'>
 [..]
 <qemu:capabilities>
   <qemu:add capability='incremental-backup'/>
 </qemu:capabilities>
 [..]
 </domain>
{% endhighlight %}

To finally enable the feature, power off and on the virtual machine once.

***Creating backups***

By default, `virtnbdbackup` saves the virtual machine config, disks and 
its logfiles to a given target directory. Its also possible to stream
the output into a uncompressed [zip archive](https://github.com/abbbi/virtnbdbackup#pipe-data-to-other-hosts)

Taking a backup is as simple as:

{% highlight bash %}
# virtnbdbackup -d vm2 -l full -o /tmp/WEEKLY_BACKUP/
 [..]
[2021-11-08 15:43:46] INFO virtnbdbackup - main [MainThread]: Backup jobs finished, stopping backup task.
[2021-11-08 15:43:46] INFO virtnbdbackup - main [MainThread]: Finished

# tree /tmp/WEEKLY_BACKUP/
 /tmp/WEEKLY_BACKUP/
├── backup.full.11082021154343.log
├── checkpoints
│   └── virtnbdbackup.0.xml
├── sda.full.data
├── vm2.cpt
└── vmconfig.virtnbdbackup.0.xml
{% endhighlight %}

From that point on, its now possible to create incremental backups:

{% highlight bash %}
 # virtnbdbackup -d vm2 -l inc -o /tmp/FULL_BACKUP/

 # tree /tmp/WEEKLY_BACKUP/
 /tmp/WEEKLY_BACKUP/
├── backup.full.11082021154343.log
├── backup.inc.11082021154538.log
├── checkpoints
│   ├── virtnbdbackup.0.xml
│   └── virtnbdbackup.1.xml
├── sda.full.data
├── sda.inc.virtnbdbackup.1.data
├── vm2.cpt
├── vmconfig.virtnbdbackup.0.xml
└── vmconfig.virtnbdbackup.1.xml
{% endhighlight %}

**Restoring backups**

The `virtnbdrestore` utility can be used to reconstruct the backup sets
into usable qcow images, like so:

{% highlight bash %}
 # virtnbdrestore -a restore -i /tmp/WEEKLY_BACKUP/ -o /tmp/VM_RESTORE
{% endhighlight %}

Using the `--until` option its also possible to only reconstruct the
images to a certain checkpoint, allowing for point in time recovery.

**Restoring single files**

Via `virtndmap` you can map full backups back into an usable block device,
which can then be accessed directly, or by creating an overlay image also
bootet:

{% highlight bash %}
# virtnbdmap -f /tmp/WEEKLY_BACKUP/sda.full.data
 [..] INFO virtnbdmap - <module> [MainThread]: Done mapping backup image to [/dev/nbd0]
 [..] INFO virtnbdmap - <module> [MainThread]: Press CTRL+C to disconnect
# fdisk -l /dev/nbd0
Disk /dev/nbd0: 2 GiB, 2147483648 bytes, 4194304 sectors
{% endhighlight %}

From here, you can either mount the disc and recover single files, or boot
from it via:

{% highlight bash %}
qemu-img create -b /dev/nbd0 -f qcow2 bootme.qcow2
qemu-system-x86_64 -enable-kvm -m 2000 -hda bootme.qcow2
{% endhighlight %}

Check out the [README](https://github.com/abbbi/virtnbdbackup#readme) for the full
feature set.
